# HipHop-Analysis-US-GER-SOM
An analysis of US American and German HipHop music using Music Information Retrieval and Machine Learning.
Part of my Master Thesis in the year 2025 at the University of Hamburg, Institute of Systematic Musicology.
Examiners: Prof. Dr. Rolf Bader, Dr. Tim Ziemer

Abstract Master Thesis:
In the more than 50 years since its founding at a block party in New York City, Hip Hop has developed into a global phenomenon. Many artists, cultures and scenes have developed and exist all over the world. However, the connections between local Hip Hop artists, their culture and their music to the origins of Hip Hop in the United States have not been well researched. While some journalists and bloggers believe American Hip Hop has a large influence on German productions to this day, no conclusive evidence was ever able to be provided. Backed by research into US American and German Hip Hop history, as well as research on the cultural influence of the United States during the Cold War, this paper analyses a data set of more than 2500 of the most influential and successful Hip Hop songs to explore the influences of American Hip Hop on German Hip Hop from the beginning of the genre to today. For this, the sound of each song was extracted using the audio features Phase Space, RMS, Peak Meter, Crest Factor and Channel Correlation with the results being displayed on a Self-Organizing-Map (SOM) and verified statistically with a PERMANOVA. The analysis not only proves a stark contrast by decade (with a large shift visible with the rise in popularity of digital music consumption around 2010), but also shows the influence and similarity of sound in the 2000s (after the German Hip Hop scene had matured) as well as the slow divergence of sonic similarity starting in the 2010s and culminating in a unique German Hip Hop sound developing in the late 2010s and early 2020s. While this research did face limitations regarding the scale of the data and the songs chosen, this paper provides a solid basis for future research on a grander scale as well as more nuanced analysis of the development of global Hip Hop.
